Hi, everyone. Thanks for joining me here today. I know it's been a long conference, but we'll
get through it. My name is Nils Bentilen. I'm the chief ML engineer at Union AI, which
is an AI infrastructure company aimed at helping organizations get value out of their data
through AI ML-driven applications. But today, I have my open source hat on, and I'm going
to talk to you a little bit about validating and testing dataframes in Python and R with
Pandera and reticulate. So, back in 2012, I don't know if you remember this article,
the Harvard Business Review named data science the sexiest job in the 21st century. But you
know what isn't sexy? Dealing with invalid data, which may seem like, you know, a losing
battle when incorrect or otherwise corrupted data gets through your pipeline, and what's
worse, when others are relying on clean data kind of downstream from you, and, you know,
if you find yourself having that responsibility of creating clean data sets for your team,
then this is a very sucky feeling. So, we all know that data validation is important,
and we all know that it's tedious and often thankless, right? When we first learn any
kind of CS concepts, we might have heard of garbage in, garbage out, data-centric machine
learnings, more recent kind of buzz phrase, and data as code. And all of these sayings
in the field point to data as one of the primary resources or assets that we use to get value
or to deliver value. But you might say, I just want to train my model, or I just want
to make that pretty plot, right? And, yeah, I was here once in a previous job. I had to
train a model. Looks very vanilla, right? You clean data, you split it and train test
splits, you train a model, you evaluate the model and train test splits. And at that time,
I was using some machine that wasn't as powerful as I wanted it to be, so it took maybe three,
four days to train my model. And when I completed, I discovered, oh, no, my evaluate model step
failed. And digging into the code and finding the bug, it was because the test data split
that I was creating, it was fairly custom and not straightforward, was incorrect. And
all I had to do, really, was do some basic assertions, basic validations to just test
whether my data splits were correct, and I would have avoided having to wait and twiddle
my thumbs for, oh, okay. Went to the orange website for a bit, sorry. Yeah, so I hope
that brief story inspires kind of or justifies this idea that data validation is about understanding
your data and then capturing that understanding as a schema. So here's a little sketch of
what a schema might look like, right? It's just a JSON blob. It says you have three columns
and they have these types. So at its core, a schema is an artifact that documents the
shape and properties of some data structure. In this case, we're talking about data frames.
And secondly, schemas enforce that shape and those properties programmatically at runtime,
perhaps. So my job in this talk is not to convince you that data science is the most
attractive part of data science, but I do want to convince you that data validation
can be fun. The way you do that is you reframe it as unit tests for your data. And just like
whenever you run your unit test, you see nice green check marks and whichever test suite
you use, you'll see some nice visual cue that all your tests are passing. Well, if you frame
data validation in this way, you get that kind of nice dopamine hit when you see all
these passing data set validation checks. But you have to do a little extra work to
get to this fun part, right? And there's a very minor shift in the way I would say one
would work to incorporate data validation into their mindset and their workflow. So
typically, you might define a goal for your analysis. You might explore your data, implement
your data processing function. You kind of spot check the output of that function. And
if it looks good, you just continue, right? Well, with the data validation mindset, essentially,
it's very similar to unit testing or test-driven development. But in a very similar way, when
you explore your data, you capture that understanding in terms of a schema. And then you validate
your implementation of your data cleaning function. And when that passes, you continue
your analysis. And so I hope I'm getting the point across that there's no substitute for
understanding your data with your own eyes. But once you get that understanding, it might
seem like a Sisyphean task to create and then maintain it as your data set shifts over time
as real-world data does. So I built Pandera in Python to lower that barrier to entry,
to create your schema, and then iterate on it over time and collaborate on a code-first
artifact that will validate your data. And my hope here is that organizations that use
it, at first it was just me and my company at the time, would build a culture of data
hygiene and seeing the value of doing these runtime checks.
So as I said, Pandera is a Python package. It's a data testing validation and testing
tool. And in this talk, I'm going to show you how you can use it with Reticulate, which
is an R Python bridge where you can interchange data functions and objects between the two
runtimes. So what? So the point here is that using Pandera in your Python and R stacks
gets you a single source of truth for your schemas, data documentation as code for you
and your team to look at, and runtime data frame schema enforcers. So you can spend less
time worrying about the correctness of your data and more time analyzing, visualizing,
and modeling them.
So in the rest of this talk, I'm going to take you through a mini data validation journey,
starting with defining our goal. So say we have a toy data set here of transactions consisting
of grocery store items and their associated prices, and we want to predict the price of
items. Obviously, there would be a lot more columns here, but just for the sake of learning
about how Pandera works, we just have two right here. So we might start off exploring
the data. We might print out the data types. We might describe some of the columns and
plot out the distribution of things we want to kind of grok better with visuals.
As you can see here, we can start building our understanding of what our schema might
look like, right? So item is categorical, represented as strings. It has three possible
values, apple, orange, banana. Price is a float, which is greater or equal to zero.
And neither columns can contain null values.
So Pandera gives you a very simple way to translate this understanding into a schema.
So let's look at our first Pandera schema. First, we import the package. Then we create
a class. And hopefully, this is kind of clear enough, even if you're not super familiar
with Python and classes. But hopefully, you can kind of read this and see what's going
on, where I'm subclassing DataFrameModel, and that's how I kind of define my schema.
Then I define some attributes in this class. So the item attribute is a string. And in
this field function, I'm basically adding some more constraints that are not just the
data type. So I'm saying item must be in this finite set of values. And similarly, price
is a float that's greater or equal to zero. And finally, both of these columns are not
nullable. Nullable equals false is actually a default, but I'm showing it here just to
be explicit.
So now that we've defined our schema, we can just call schema.validate. And if the data
you pass into validate is valid, then it simply returns a valid data. So it applies
a bunch of those checks. And if it's OK, you get your data, and you can continue whatever
you're doing with that data.
However, if the data is invalid, so in this case, we're defining invalid data with a NAND
value in the price column and then squash as an item, which has a negative price, which
doesn't make sense unless I'm paying you $1,000 for squash. If I try validating this invalid
data, I get a schema error. And if we catch that schema error, we can get the failure
cases that Pandera found.
In this case, Pandera is just going to kind of serially go through all those checks and
raise the first one failure case it sees.
Now that might not be good enough. I want to see what all the errors are. So there's
a lazy equals true option keyword argument you can pass to the validate method. And if
you do that, Pandera will raise a schema errors exception. And in this case, the failure cases
are a lot more informative. So we can see that failure cases is itself a data frame
that contains information about where the error happened, what column was the offending
column, which check was associated with failure, and the exact failure case value that caused
this error, and then some bonus metadata of where the index was in the data frame.
So as you can see, this package is really optimized for just sort of like data science,
data engineers, ML engineers who are in the weeds in the code and kind of want to roll
their own kind of reporting layer. So this is how Pandera reports errors.
You can easily integrate this with your existing pipeline. So assuming that you have sort of
functions defined for each step of your pipeline, this also works with methods, of course. But
in this case, we have a clean data function that doesn't do anything. It just returns
the input. So this is the incorrect implementation. But in order to check the output of this function
to make sure it conforms with the schema as we've defined it, we decorate the function
with this check types decorator. Of course, pass lazy equals true. And then we use type
annotations to say, hey, this is a data frame that conforms with this schema. And once you've
done this, clean data is now a data validator plus a function. So every time we call clean
data, we check all the values of the output. In this case, we recover the failure cases
we saw earlier. So you might say, well, squash is an actual
grocery item that might make sense to have in this data set. So this is just a slide
to communicate essentially that there is this kind of constant updating process where your
schema is stateless. It's all described in your code. And so as your data shifts over
time, you're going to have to update that schema and collaborate with your teammates,
make changes to your source code, check that into Git. And you essentially have a track
record of all the changes that happened with your schema.
So in a more realistic setting, you may have thousands, hundreds, or thousands of items.
So in the wild, I've kind of seen people use a pattern where they kind of read in some
metadata from a JSON file or something, or they just have it as a variable, like as a
constant variable, and then they just plug that in here.
Pandera also provides some additional nice things to refine your schema and refine the
validation routine you want to apply to your data. And the way you do this is you define
a config class underneath your schema. And if you say coerce equals true, Pandera, when
you call validate, it's going to try to coerce all the raw data types into the specified
data types. This is a potentially destructive, lossy transformation. So if you don't want
to do it, by default, it's false.
If you say ordered is true, then the raw data coming in needs to be in the same exact
order as you specified in the schema. This is important to some people.
Strict allows you to say, hey, I want to raise an error if there are random dangling columns
that are just there in my data that aren't specified in my schema. I can actually say
strict equals filter, and it'll remove those columns.
I can say drop invalid rows equals true, and any checks that fail are considered invalid
rows, and those are dropped if that's what you want. And then finally, unique column
names is true, just does what it says. There are a few more options, but these just want
to give you a sampling.
There are also some built-in checks. So as you saw from that field function that's attached
to the column attributes, we can define some other constraints, like the values must encompass
all of the finite sets. So unlike is in, which a valid column would just have a column with
all As, a valid column in this case would be a column that has to contain at least one
of each of those.
You can also do string pattern matching. There are a few other built-in methods here, like
in-range checks, some very basic ones, greater or equal to, less than or equal to, things
like this.
However, if the built-in checks don't fulfill your use case, Pandera just makes it super
easy to create custom checks. And so you do this by defining methods that you decorate
with pandera.check. And in this case, this will just make sure column 1 and 2's means
are within some range. So as long as this method outputs a Boolean, a Boolean series,
Pandera will know what to do with it.
You can also do data frame level checks by saying at data frame check, and you essentially
have access to the entire data frame. And here you can do whatever you want, as long
as you stick with that kind of constraint of outputting a Boolean, a Boolean series,
or a data frame series.
The last part I'll show you before going into R is regex column matching. So say you have
a data frame with 1,000 columns, and they all kind of have similar semantics, but they're
kind of named in a similar way. You can specify an attribute that has an alias that essentially
becomes a regular expression when you say regex is true. Same goes with these at check
column level checks. And essentially, you will apply the validation to any column that
matches that regular expression.
So just a brief comment before going into reticulate is this quarter document is validated
by Pandera. So minor meta comment there. All the code you see here has been validated.
So that's awesome.
So just to address the elephant in the room, there are packages that do data validation
like point blank and validate. Why would you want to do this Frankenstein's thing with
Python in the first place? And to be honest, the real answer is because we can. But to
give you a few reasons that may make sense, maybe you're already using Pandera, and you
want to reuse those schemas in our runtime. Maybe the Pandera programming model just fits
better in your brain. I don't know. Or you just want R and Python to get along, and you
just want to give it a try.
But with that, let me import a few things in my toolkit to get started here. So using
dplyr, knitter, and reticulate, and I'm using a conda env where I have all of my dependencies
installed. And it just works, right? I define a data frame in R, and I use the pi entry
point here. And it returns a valid data. Just a warning, this hasn't been comprehensively
tested in all the data types, so I don't want to get you too excited. You can catch
Python exceptions. Sorry, that's a typo. It should be R exceptions. But yes, the Python
exceptions in the R reticulate runtime. So this is essentially the equivalent of the
try catch thing in Python. And we get the same failure cases.
And the last thing I just want to show you here is synthesizing test data with Pandera.
So if you call schema.example or $example, I can create valid data under the constraints
of my schema. And sort of running low on time, but this is super useful for unit testing.
So yeah, maybe I can just show you this test process test that will create some mock data,
try to process some data, and tell you if your tests have failed or not. And so in the
happy path, they pass. But if there's a bug in the data, like a column that has a typo,
the test will fail. And data validation is not only about testing the actual data, but
also the functions that produce them. So you can get started installing Pandera.
But I do want to say last that I think our data wants to be validated, so we should help
them along with that. Thank you.
Niels, you have a lot of questions. I'm sure people are going to be super excited to talk
to you right outside. We'll do one very quick one. Is Pandera configured to only work with
Pandas DataFrames, or does it work with a variety of classes like Polars?
Yeah, Polars is on the roadmap, so that is an issue for this. It currently supports Moden,
PySpark, so it's obviously Python-focused, Dask DataFrames, GeoPandas DataFrames, with
Polars on the way. And then we kind of have our eyes set on X-Array and IBIS, so IBIS
would be for in-database validation.
Very cool. Thank you so much. This was great.
Thank you.